=pod

=head1 NAME

gfold - Generalized fold change for ranking differentially expressed genes from RNA-seq data.

GFOLD is especially useful when no replicate is available. GFOLD generalizes
the fold change by considering the posterior distribution of log fold change,
such that each gene is assigned a reliable fold change. It overcomes the
shortcoming of p-value that measures the significance of whether a gene is
differentially expressed under different conditions instead of measuring
relative expression changes, which are more interesting in many studies. It
also overcomes the shortcoming of fold change that suffers from the fact that
the fold change of genes with low read count are not so reliable as that of
genes with high read count, even these two genes show the same fold change. 

=head1 CITATION

Feng J, Meyer CA, Wang Q, Liu JS, Liu XS, Zhang Y. GFOLD: a generalized fold change for ranking differentially expressed genes from RNA-seq data. B<Bioinformatics> 2012 

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<gfold> B<JOBS> B<OPTIONS>

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Example 1: Count reads and rank genes

In the following example, hg19Ref.gtf is the ucsc knownGene table for hg19;
sample1.sam and sample2.sam are the mapped reads in SAM format. 

=over 3

=item B<gfold count -ann hg19Ref.gtf -tag sample1.sam -o sample1.read_cnt>

=item B<gfold count -ann hg19Ref.gtf -tag sample2.sam -o sample2.read_cnt>

=item B<gfold diff -s1 sample1 -s2 sample2 -suf .read_cnt -o sample1VSsample2.diff >

=back


=head2 Example 2: Count reads

This example utilizes samtools to produce mapped reads in SAM format from BAM format.

=over 3

=item B<samtools view sample1.bam | gfold count -ann hg19Ref.gtf -tag stdin -o sample1.read_cnt>

=back


=head2 Example 3: Identify differentially expressed genes without replicates

Suppose there are two samples: sample1 and sample2 with corresponding read
count file being sample1.read_cnt sample2.read_cnt. This example finds
differentially expressed genes using default parameters on two samples

=over 3

=item B<gfold diff -s1 sample1 -s2 sample2 -suf .read_cnt -o sample1VSsample2.diff>

=back


=head2 Example 4: Identify differentially expressed genes with replicates

This example finds differentially expressed genes using default parameters on two group of samples.

=over 3

=item B<gfold diff -s1 sample1,sample2,sample3 -s2 sample4,sample5,sample6 -suf .read_cnt -o 123VS456.diff>

=back

=head2 Example 5: Identify differentially expressed genes with replicates only in one condition

This example finds differentially expressed genes using default parameters on two group of samples.
Only the first group contains replicates. In this case, the variance estimated based on the first
group will be used as the variance of the second group.

=over 3

=item B<gfold diff -s1 sample1,sample2 -s2 sample3 -suf .read_cnt -o 12VS3.diff>

=back



=head1 JOBS

=over 3

=item B<-h>

Print help information

=item B<count>

Given the gene annotation in GTF/GPF/BED format and mapped short reads in SAM/BED
format, count the number of reads mapped to each gene. Because of possible overlapping 
of multiple genes, a read could be mapped to the overlaped region of multiple genes.
In this case, a read is counted multiple times with each time for each gene. Furthermore,
if a gene is on multiple chromosomes or different strands of the same chromosome, only exons
on one strand of one chromosome (the one appear first in the annotation file) will be 
assigned to this gene. Exons not on this strand of the chromosome will be discarded.

=item B<diff>

For each gene, calculate GFOLD value and other statistics. B<diff> accepts the output of
B<count> as the input. Please refer to the output format of B<count> for more
information about the input format. If you are not satisfied with the strategy
adopted by B<count>, you can generate gene read counts by yourself. In the input for B<diff>
'GeneSymbol' and 'Read Count' are critical. If you fake 'Gene exon length', the RPKM calculated
will not be valid. You can fake other columns to make gfold run. Further more
the order of gene names should be the same for different samples. The third column of the output of B<count> 
(gene length) only influences the RPKM in the output of B<diff>. If it is missing, RPKM 
will not be generated by B<diff>. B<diff> does not use the forth column of the output of B<count>.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 3

=item B<-ann> <file>

Gene annotation file in GTF/GPF/BED format. Note that the knownGene table
downloaded from UCSC is in GPF format. For job B<count> only.

=item B<-annf> <GTF/GPF/BED>

The format of gene annotation file. Default GTF (Gene Transfer Format). For job
B<count> only. For GTF format, in the last column, 'gene_id' and
'transcript_id' are required. 'gene_name' and other IDs are optional. For BED
format, please provide format which contains 6 columns with the ID at 4'th
column.  For GPF (Gene Prediction Format), in short, from UCSC Table Browser,
the 'knownGene' table with all fields is in GPF and the 'refGene' table without
the first column is in GPF format. Note that for either 'knownGene' or
'refGene' table, the downloaded file would contain a header which should be
removed before calling GFOLD. More specifically, a file in GPF format contains
12 columns separated by TABs (adapted from UCSC):

=begin html

<TABLE BORDER="1">
<TR><TD>name      </TD>      <TD> Name of gene</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>chrom     </TD>      <TD> Reference sequence chromosome or scaffold</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>strand    </TD>      <TD> + or - for strand</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>txStart   </TD>      <TD> Transcription start position</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>txEnd     </TD>      <TD> Transcription end position</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>cdsStart  </TD>      <TD> Coding region start</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>cdsEnd    </TD>      <TD> Coding region end</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>exonCount </TD>      <TD> Number of exons</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>exonStarts</TD>      <TD> Exon start positions separated by commas</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>exonEnds  </TD>      <TD> Exon end positions separated by commas</TD></TR>
<TR><TD>proteinID </TD>      <TD> UniProt display ID for Known Genes, UniProt accession or RefSeq protein ID for UCSC Genes </TD></TR>
<TR><TD>alignID   </TD>      <TD> Unique identifier for each (known gene, alignment position) pair</TD></TR>
</TABLE>

=end html

=item B<-tag> <file>

Short reads in SAM format. 'stdin' stands for standard input stream. For job B<count> only.

=item B<-tagf> <SAM/BED>

The format of short reads. Default SAM. For job B<count> only.

=item B<-s> <T/F>

Whether is the sequencing data strand specific? T stands for strand specific.
Default F. If you are not clear about this, using default parameter should be
OK even for the strand specific case. For job B<count> only.

=item B<-acc> <T/F>

When no replicate is available, whether to use accurate method to calculate GFOLD value. T stands for accurate which depends on
sequencing depth and slower, F stands for MCMC.  Default T. For job B<diff> only.

=item B<-o> <file>

The file for output for all jobs. 

=item B<-s1> <file>

The prefix for gene read count of the 1st group output by B<count>. Multiple
prefixes are separated by commas. For job B<diff> only. If you have gene read
count generated by other ways instead of job B<count>, make sure that the
format are the same for all files. Each file contains two columns corresponding
to gene names and read counts separated by a TAB. All files are sorted by gene
names and have the same number of lines.

=item B<-s2> <file>

The prefix for gene read count of the 2st group output by B<count>. Multiple
prefixes are separated by commas. For job B<diff> only.

=item B<-suf> <string>

The suffix for gene read count file specified by B<-s1> and B<-s2>. For job B<diff> only.

=item B<-sc> <num>

The significant cutoff for fold change. Default 0.01. For job B<diff> only.

=item B<-bi> <num>

For MCMC, the iterations for burn-in phase. Default 1000. For job B<diff> only.

=item B<-si> <num>

For MCMC, the iterations for sampling phase. Default 1000. For job B<diff> only.

=item B<-r> <num>

The maximum number of selected pairs for calculating empirical FDR. Default 20. For job B<diff> only.

=item B<-v> <num>

Verbos level. A larger value gives more information of the running process.
Default 2.

=item B<-norm> <Count/DESeq/NO>

The way to do normalization. 'Count' stands for normalization by total number
of mapped reads. 'DESeq' stands for the normalization proposed by DESeq. 'NO' 
stands for no normalization. You can also specifiy a list of normalization constant
separated by commas. E.g. 1.2,2.1,1.0,2.0. Note that the number of constants
should be the same as the total number of samples (group1 and group2) and the order
should be for -s1 followed by for -s2. GFOLD using normalization constants not by
directly multiplication (scaling up) nor division (scaling down). The normalization 
constants will be built into the model. In the model, division or multiplication 
has no difference. Default 'DESeq'. 

=back

=head1 OUTPUT FORMAT

All fields in a output file are separated by TABs.

=over 3

=item For JOB B<count>:

The output file contains 5 columns: 

=over 3

=item 1. B<GeneSymbol>:

For BED file, this is the 4'th column. For GPF file, this is the first column. For GTF format, this corresponds to 'gene_id' if it exists, 'NA' otherwise.

=item 2. B<GeneName>:

For BED file, this is always 'NA'. For GPF file, this is the 12'th column. For GTF format, this corresponds to 'gene_name' if it exists, 'NA' otherwise.

=item 3. B<Read Count>:

The number of reads mapped to this gene.

=item 4. B<Gene exon length>:

The length sum of all the exons of this gene.

=item 5. B<RPKM>:

The expression level of this gene in RPKM.

=back

=item For JOB B<diff>:

The output file contains 6 columns:

=over 3

=item  1. B<#GeneSymbol>:

Gene symbols. The order of gene symbol is the same as what appearing in the read count file.

=item  2. B<GeneName>:

Gene name. The order of gene name is the same as what appearing in the read count file.

=item  3. B<GFOLD>:

GFOLD value for every gene. The GFOLD value could be considered as a reliable
log2 fold change. It is positive/negative if the gene is up/down regulated. The
main usefulness of GFOLD is to provide a biological meanlingful ranking of the
genes. The GFOLD value is zero if the gene doesn't show differential
expression.  If the log2 fold change is treated as a random variable, a
positive GFOLD value x means that the probability of the log2 fold change
(2nd/1st) being larger than x is (1 - the parameter specified by B<-sc>); A
negative GFOLD value x means that the probability of the log2 fold change
(2st/1nd) being smaller than x is (1 - the parameter specified by B<-sc>). If
this file is sorted by this column in descending order then genes ranked at the
top are differentially up-regulated and genes ranked at the bottom are
differentially down-regulated. Note that a gene with GFOLD value 0 should
never be considered differentially expressed. However, it doesn't mean that all
genes with non-negative GFOLD value are differentially expressed. For taking top
differentially expressed genes, the user is responsible for selecting the cutoff.

=item  4. B<E-FDR>:

Empirical FDR based on replicates. It is always 1 when no replicates are available.

=item  5. B<log2fdc>:

log2 fold change. If no replicate is available, and B<-acc> is T, log2 fold change
is based on read counts and normalization constants. Otherwise, log2 fold change is
based on the sampled expression level from the posterior distribution.

=item  6. B<1stRPKM>:

The RPKM for the first condition. It is available only if gene length is available. 
If multiple replicates are available, the RPKM is calculated simply by summing over
replicates. Because RPKM is acturally using sequencing depth as the normalization 
constant, log2 fold change based on RPKM could be different from the log2fdc field.

=item  7. B<2ndRPKM>:

The RPKM for the second condition. It is available only if gene length is available.
Please refer to B<1stRPKM> for more information.

=back

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Jianxing Feng (jianxing.tongji@gmail.com)

=cut
